carabids_00_project.md, before:

Spring 2020 CU Boulder EBIO Ecological Forecasting Seminar
Project: NEON-Niwot forest species SDMs

This is a centralized location to organize our thoughts and resources for this project. Thoughts and data are focused on Niwot Ridge site, unless specified otherwise.

##### Scientific questions we could ask
1. How will carabid species distributions shift with global warming in a subalpine forest?  
1. Is there a shift in community composition through time at all in the NEON data available? For multiple sites, account for habitat and environmental differences. see Brooks et al. 2012 hyp1
1. Across NEON sites, do temporal community trends differ in magnitude and direction between habitats and regions? see Brooks et al. 2012 hyp2
1. Are community trends unique to combinations of habitats and regions? That is, might we expect species's responses to environmental change to be dictated mostly by habitat? see Brooks et al. 2012 hyp3
2. What are shifts in phenology of species through time? see Hoekman et al. 2017  
3. What is carabid community response to habitat and land-use change over time?  
4. What are shifts in phenology of species through time and across habitat? see Hoekman et al. 2017
5. Is fine-scale change in microhabitat heterogeneity more important to carabid abundance and richness than larger-scale changes in landscape diversity? Could more stable habitats (e.g. forest) buffer wider-scale perturbations? see Brooks et al. 2012
6. "How much data is enough to forecast accurately?": Develop a prediction model and run it (say) 35 years into the future. Assume this forecast data is real. Re-run the model, giving it varying amounts of "real" data (1 yr, 3 yrs, 5 yrs, 10 yrs etc). For each amount of "real" data, assess forecast accuracy at various timesteps; i.e. how far into the future can we accurately forecast with a given amount of "real" data? Figure out how to predict standard error change through time by simulating fake data.
7. Predict beetle abundance and and composition at a different spot in the same year. Or forecast rel abundance for the next collection period
8. Brett feedback from class pres - we're describing a bootstrapped forecast (generating fake data - if this is the truth, what uncertainty is there?) Think about the generative process in data collection

##### Why carabids?
* identifying habitat associations in a dominant insect group would be an important step toward understanding the consequences of global climate change in high mountain areas  (Hiramatsu and Usio 2018)
* Because of their known sensitivity to changes in habitat structure and requisitly altered microhabitat, carabid beetles have been suggested to serve as useful bioindicators of environmental and land use change (Hiramatsu and Usio 2018)
* To date, numerous studies have shown that carabid beetle richness and/or assemblage composition change along altitudinal gradients [5–7] and/or with vegetation type [8–11] (Hiramatsu and Usio 2018)
* Remote sensing can measure carabid habitat at the local and landscape scales. Identifying the predictive relationships between beetle assemblages to remote sensing variables allows conservation managers to measure carabids at a scale appropriate for their biology and scale up to that which management decisions function (Muller et al. 2009).

##### Data products we could use
* Response variable: carabid community abundance and composition  
    * Source: NEON carabid data at NIWO 2015-19  

| Predictor variable  | source | dpID | spatial distribution | temporal distribution | literature |
| ------------- | ----- | -------- | --------------------- | ---------- | ------------ |
| carabid richness & abundance | NEON | DP1.10022.001 | 4 traps per plot (10) at each terrestrial site, arrayed 20m from the center of the plot in each cardinal direction | 2015-2019, biweekly sampling during growing season | [NEON carabid data user guide](https://github.com/EBIO6100Spring2020/Data-sandbox/blob/master/docs/NEON_beetle_userGuide_vA.pdf) [Hoekman et al. 2017](https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/ecs2.1744) |
| carabid DNA barcode | NEON | DP1.10020.001 |  |  |  |
| slope/aspect | NEON | DP3.30025.001 | same as elevation | same as elevation | [data page](https://data.neonscience.org/data-products/DP3.30025.001) |
| elevation | NEON | DP3.30024.001 | full extent of site, well beyond pitfalls, 1mx1m resolution | 2017-2019 (Sept, Aug, Aug) | [data page](https://data.neonscience.org/data-products/DP3.30024.001) | 
| precipitation | NEON | DP1.00006.001 | looks like a couple of sensors per NEON site - CHECK | (almost) every month 2017-current | [neon data page](https://data.neonscience.org/data-products/DP1.00006.001) | 
| relative humidity | NEON | DP1.00098.001 | sensors on flux tower and in soil array - CHECK | 1min and 30min time series, 2017-current | [data page](https://data.neonscience.org/data-products/DP1.00098.001) | 
| IR biological temp | NEON | DP1.00005.001 | a couple sensors near tower | 1min and 30min series, every month 2017-current | [data page](https://data.neonscience.org/data-products/DP1.00005.001) | 
| Shortwave radiation (direct and diffuse pyranometer) | NEON | DP1.00014.001 |  |  |  | 
| Shortwave and longwave radiation (net radiometer) | NEON | DP1.00023.001 |  |  |  | 
| LAI - spectrometer - flightline | NEON | DP2.30012.001 |  |  |  | 
| soil temp | NEON | DP1.00041.001 | a couple sensors near tower | 1min, 30min series, mid2017-current | [data page](https://data.neonscience.org/data-products/DP1.00041.001) |
| Soil water content and water salinity | NEON | DP1.00094.001 | many base plots, including pitfall locations |  |  | 
| Woody plant vegetation structure | NEON | DP1.10098.001 | 38 base plots, including pitfall locations (24 base plots in 2019) | annual samples, 2015-16, 2019. Not all plots were sampled each year. | [TOS Science Design for Plant Biomass and Productivity](https://data.neonscience.org/documents/10179/1723439/NEON.DOC.000914vA/b21f8a50-2f1e-4261-8890-3f922fd78141)| 
| Litterfall and fine woody debris sampling | NEON | DP1.10033.001 | 12 base plots, including pitfall locations | monthly samples (some gaps by location), June or July through November, 2016-2019 |  | 
| Plant presence and percent cover | NEON | DP1.10058.001 | | |[data page](https://data.neonscience.org/data-products/DP1.10058.001) |
| [Permanent forest plot data](https://portal.lternet.edu/nis/mapbrowse?packageid=knb-lter-nwt.207.3) | NiwotLTER | NA |  | 1982-2016 | [Chai et al. 2019](https://www.nrcresearchpress.com/doi/pdfplus/10.1139/cjfr-2019-0023) | 
| canopy gaps |  |  |  |  |  | 
| hydrology |  |  |  |  |  | 
| % canopy cover |  |  |  |  |  | 
| litterfall/woody debris |  |  |  |  |  | 
| surface temp |  |  |  |  |  | 
| microtopography |  |  |  |  |  | 
| time to snowmelt |  |  |  |  |  | 
| max. snowpack |  |  |  |  |  | 

| Miscellaneous data  | source | spatial distribution | temporal distribution |
| ------- | ----------------- | --------- | ---------- | 
| carabids | [carabids.org](https://www.carabids.org/portal/en-us/explore) | Europe, Africa, Asia |  |  
|  |  |  |  |  

##### Carabid traits
These are the 7 most abundant and accurately identified species at Niwot Ridge.
| Species | Traits | Reference |
| ---| ----------------| ---|
| Amara alpina (Paykull 1790) | **Diet** Omnivores. Diet consists (likely in equal parts in terms of biomass) of animal prey and plant biomass, including bryophyte mosses and seeds **Phenology** Peak activity beginning of July in Norwegian mountains. Likely follows a univoltine life-cycle and can take up to 2 years to complete its life-cycle.  Prolonged life-cycle is an adaptation to life in the alpine-tundra environment with generally shorter seasons. Emerges right after snow melt, with males appearing earlier than females. **Reproduction** At peak activity, they copulate, lay their eggs, and many of the adults perish shortly after. Larvae probably hatch in the late summer/early fall. **Dispersal** Low rates of dispersal capability. Flying is sporadic, despite being winged (can be either macropterous or brachypterous). Running on the ground is common. Crucially, undergoes phases of immobility during development (eggs, larval pupation). Low mobility, at least during development, makes it more susceptible to elevational effects. Distances covered are likely to be less than 20 m per 24 h **Habitat** Low-middle alpine. Common inhabitant of open, alpine-tundra environment. Does not seem to favor drier soils, as other species of the genus seem to. Occurrence is stenotopic at ridges & widespread on slopes **Overwintering** Adults have been shown to hibernate during winter. However, larval overwintering (in the last instar) and consequent (quick) maturation in the following spring is also possible. The life-cycle may thus be very flexible. Hibernation of both developmental stages means that these species are well-equipped to act as colonizers and pioneers in the alpine. **Vegetation** lichen heath/ lichen-rich dwarf-shrub veg also: sparse veg., snow-bed & grass dominated veg. |[Naujok & Finch 2004](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/256457268_Communities_and_spatio-temporal_patterns_of_epigeic_beetles_Coleoptera_in_high_mountain_habitats_of_the_Central_Norwegian_Scandes_with_special_emphasis_on_carabid_beetles_Carabidae) [Beckers et al. 2020](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31979048) |
| Amara quenseli | Anna |   | 
| Calathus advena | Anna |   |
| Carabus taedatus | Anna |   |
| Cymindis unicolor | **Tribe**: Lebiini **Habitat**: An arctic-alpine species occurring in tundra and tundra-forest transition zones; inhabits treeless, well-drained environments |  [Garry 1990](https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/books/book/386/chapter/3797287/Environmental-analysis-of-a-Twocreekan-aged-beetle) , [Nelson 1988](https://www-jstor-org.colorado.idm.oclc.org/stable/4008554?seq=1#metadata_info_tab_contents)| 
| Harpalus nigritarsis | **Tribe** Harpalini  **Diet** (for genus): seed-eaters as adults and typically also as larvae. **Phenology** annual life cycle |  Kent Wildlife Trust |
| Pterostichus restrictus | **Tribe** Pterostichini |   |

##### Data thoughts & questions
* How to choose which species to model? [Dittrich et al. 2020](https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/12/1/80/htm) chose species to reduce interannual variability by selecting ones that are (1) not directly depending on ephemeral resources and (2) nonspecific predators, feeding on various soil arthropods.
* Model occupancy or abundance? Maybe occupancy since we don't have abundant records
* Canopy structural variability seems like an important predictor (Davies & Asner 2014) - how to quantify this?
* Incorporate structural variables at trap-, plot-, and site-scales. Muller et al 2014 found higher arthropod diversity with increased canopy structural variability and density *at the tree scale*, but lower diversity *at the stand scale*
* Proxy for understory veg could be elevation or dist to stream
* NEON veg diversity data (2m scale cover)
* Climatic/meteorological variables: When Henry Nix started creating SDMs, bioclim was important> WorldClim should be at a fine enough scale for across-site NEON comparisons. Kiarney 2018 & 2019 (Methods in Ecology) used worldclim or bioclim to get 30m scale meteorological data for small-scale microclimate modeling

##### Literature
* Plant diversity sampling design at NEON, [Barnett et al. 2019](https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1002/ecs2.2603)
* NEON design for ground beetle sampling [Hoekman et al. 2017](https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/ecs2.1744)
* Carabids in a Japanese Alpine-Subalpine Zone, [Hiramatsu and Usio 2018](https://www.hindawi.com/journals/psyche/2018/9754376/)
* Forest beetle assemblages and LiDAR, [Muller & Brandl 2009](https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1111/j.1365-2664.2009.01677.x)
    * LiDAR-derived variables: canopy height SD and max tree height at traps from DSM, mean altitude at trap from DTM, microclimaatic conditions proexy from laser penetration rate - see Table 2
    * decrease in body size with laser penetration ratio and larger species in closed forests
    * increase in activity of xylophagous species with an increase of the laser penetration ratio.
    * decrease in the activity of mycetophagous and phytophagous species with altitude because of a reduced availability of hosts. 
* The UK's ECN, kinda like the US's NEON [Brooks et al. 2012]()
    * largest population declines in montane habitat
* Forty years of carabid beetle research in Europe, [Kotze et al. 2011](https://zookeys.pensoft.net/article/2426/)
* Use satellite imagery to build mountainous rove beetle SDM. Machine learning models performed better than GLM and GAM, [Dittrich et al. 2020](https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/12/1/80/htm)
* studies that have used satellite-derived parameters for SDMs in mountainous regions
   * [Dudov et al. 2017](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1134/S2079086417030021)
   * [Oke & Thompson 2015](https://reader.elsevier.com/reader/sd/pii/S0304380015000381?token=D5827B496B1E08299C00AF3D1755BBDB0C19DFECB17E90ED55332A0604FCEBE37DD47F413F373E089863A29B9676D705)
* Review of advances in animal ecology from LiDAR - helpful table for invertebrates, definitions of structural terms [Davies & Asner 2014](https://scse.d.umn.edu/sites/scse.d.umn.edu/files/joyce_paper_2.pdf)
   * canopy variability - Beetle body size decreased with increasing variability, [Muller & Brandl 2009](https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1111/j.1365-2664.2009.01677.x); Arthropod diversity increased at the tree scale, [Muller et al. 2013](https://reader.elsevier.com/reader/sd/pii/S0378112713006816?token=B13AFBBE5F3F96F4728531E4B474FB6D9145A9264D543CBC00589FD4206681536C433D888E337EF8E623D10FB685F360)
   * canopy density - Arthropod diversity increased with increasing canopy density at tree scale, but decreased at stand scale, [Muller et al. 2013](https://reader.elsevier.com/reader/sd/pii/S0378112713006816?token=B13AFBBE5F3F96F4728531E4B474FB6D9145A9264D543CBC00589FD4206681536C433D888E337EF8E623D10FB685F360)
   * canopy height - Beetle body size increased, abundance decreased with increasing height, [Muller & Brandl 2009](https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1111/j.1365-2664.2009.01677.x)
   * elevation - Beetle species richness and spider diversity increased, [Muller & Brandl 2009](https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1111/j.1365-2664.2009.01677.x)
with higher elevation
   * hydrology - Female carabid beetles preferred steep slopes with high flow accumulation, [Work et al. 2011](https://zookeys.pensoft.net/articles.php?id=2927)
   * aspect - Female carabid beetles preferred cooler (north-facing) slopes, [Work et al. 2011](https://zookeys.pensoft.net/articles.php?id=2927)
   * From the eight studies available for review, variability in the canopy profile (both vertical and horizontal), or ‘structural variability’ (Box 3), rather than a single structural metric, was most important for invertebrate assemblages
   * make species distribution models phylogenetically-informed? [Smith et al. 2018](https://reader.elsevier.com/reader/sd/pii/S0169534718302696?token=75E2391C9E4901CA70BFE3188EE133719E1BD8CDBBEB7C0465F3156ECE20664743F44B95A73CB1DDD932089501F2BA27)

##### Resources
* [taxize](https://ropensci.org/tutorials/taxize_tutorial/) package for taxon nomenclature
* Could use McCain Lab carabids from Niwot Ridge: collected along elevational gradient, have veg data associated

Commit message:

moved data organization table to spreadsheet

carabids_00_project.md, after:

Spring 2020 CU Boulder EBIO Ecological Forecasting Seminar
Project: NEON-Niwot forest species SDMs

This is a centralized location to organize our thoughts and resources for this project. Thoughts and data are focused on Niwot Ridge site, unless specified otherwise.

##### Scientific questions we could ask
1. How will carabid species distributions shift with global warming in a subalpine forest?  
1. Is there a shift in community composition through time at all in the NEON data available? For multiple sites, account for habitat and environmental differences. see Brooks et al. 2012 hyp1
1. Across NEON sites, do temporal community trends differ in magnitude and direction between habitats and regions? see Brooks et al. 2012 hyp2
1. Are community trends unique to combinations of habitats and regions? That is, might we expect species's responses to environmental change to be dictated mostly by habitat? see Brooks et al. 2012 hyp3
2. What are shifts in phenology of species through time? see Hoekman et al. 2017  
3. What is carabid community response to habitat and land-use change over time?  
4. What are shifts in phenology of species through time and across habitat? see Hoekman et al. 2017
5. Is fine-scale change in microhabitat heterogeneity more important to carabid abundance and richness than larger-scale changes in landscape diversity? Could more stable habitats (e.g. forest) buffer wider-scale perturbations? see Brooks et al. 2012
6. "How much data is enough to forecast accurately?": Develop a prediction model and run it (say) 35 years into the future. Assume this forecast data is real. Re-run the model, giving it varying amounts of "real" data (1 yr, 3 yrs, 5 yrs, 10 yrs etc). For each amount of "real" data, assess forecast accuracy at various timesteps; i.e. how far into the future can we accurately forecast with a given amount of "real" data? Figure out how to predict standard error change through time by simulating fake data.
7. Predict beetle abundance and and composition at a different spot in the same year. Or forecast rel abundance for the next collection period
8. Brett feedback from class pres - we're describing a bootstrapped forecast (generating fake data - if this is the truth, what uncertainty is there?) Think about the generative process in data collection

##### Why carabids?
* identifying habitat associations in a dominant insect group would be an important step toward understanding the consequences of global climate change in high mountain areas  (Hiramatsu and Usio 2018)
* Because of their known sensitivity to changes in habitat structure and requisitly altered microhabitat, carabid beetles have been suggested to serve as useful bioindicators of environmental and land use change (Hiramatsu and Usio 2018)
* To date, numerous studies have shown that carabid beetle richness and/or assemblage composition change along altitudinal gradients [5–7] and/or with vegetation type [8–11] (Hiramatsu and Usio 2018)
* Remote sensing can measure carabid habitat at the local and landscape scales. Identifying the predictive relationships between beetle assemblages to remote sensing variables allows conservation managers to measure carabids at a scale appropriate for their biology and scale up to that which management decisions function (Muller et al. 2009).

##### Data products we could use
* Response variable: carabid community abundance and composition  
    * Source: NEON carabid data at NIWO 2015-18  

See [data organization](https://github.com/EBIO6100Spring2020/niwot_NEON_carabids/blob/master/data_organization.csv) for more details on what predictors we're considering and how we'll summarize them for our analyses.

| Miscellaneous data  | source | spatial distribution | temporal distribution |
| ------- | ----------------- | --------- | ---------- | 
| carabids | [carabids.org](https://www.carabids.org/portal/en-us/explore) | Europe, Africa, Asia |  |  
|  |  |  |  |  

##### Carabid traits
These are the 7 most abundant and accurately identified species at Niwot Ridge.
| Species | Traits | Reference |
| ---| ----------------| ---|
| Amara alpina (Paykull 1790) | **Diet** Omnivores. Diet consists (likely in equal parts in terms of biomass) of animal prey and plant biomass, including bryophyte mosses and seeds **Phenology** Peak activity beginning of July in Norwegian mountains. Likely follows a univoltine life-cycle and can take up to 2 years to complete its life-cycle.  Prolonged life-cycle is an adaptation to life in the alpine-tundra environment with generally shorter seasons. Emerges right after snow melt, with males appearing earlier than females. **Reproduction** At peak activity, they copulate, lay their eggs, and many of the adults perish shortly after. Larvae probably hatch in the late summer/early fall. **Dispersal** Low rates of dispersal capability. Flying is sporadic, despite being winged (can be either macropterous or brachypterous). Running on the ground is common. Crucially, undergoes phases of immobility during development (eggs, larval pupation). Low mobility, at least during development, makes it more susceptible to elevational effects. Distances covered are likely to be less than 20 m per 24 h **Habitat** Low-middle alpine. Common inhabitant of open, alpine-tundra environment. Does not seem to favor drier soils, as other species of the genus seem to. Occurrence is stenotopic at ridges & widespread on slopes **Overwintering** Adults have been shown to hibernate during winter. However, larval overwintering (in the last instar) and consequent (quick) maturation in the following spring is also possible. The life-cycle may thus be very flexible. Hibernation of both developmental stages means that these species are well-equipped to act as colonizers and pioneers in the alpine. **Vegetation** lichen heath/ lichen-rich dwarf-shrub veg also: sparse veg., snow-bed & grass dominated veg. |[Naujok & Finch 2004](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/256457268_Communities_and_spatio-temporal_patterns_of_epigeic_beetles_Coleoptera_in_high_mountain_habitats_of_the_Central_Norwegian_Scandes_with_special_emphasis_on_carabid_beetles_Carabidae) [Beckers et al. 2020](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31979048) |
| Amara quenseli | Anna |   | 
| Calathus advena | Anna |   |
| Carabus taedatus | Anna |   |
| Cymindis unicolor | **Tribe**: Lebiini **Habitat**: An arctic-alpine species occurring in tundra and tundra-forest transition zones; inhabits treeless, well-drained environments |  [Garry 1990](https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/books/book/386/chapter/3797287/Environmental-analysis-of-a-Twocreekan-aged-beetle) , [Nelson 1988](https://www-jstor-org.colorado.idm.oclc.org/stable/4008554?seq=1#metadata_info_tab_contents)| 
| Harpalus nigritarsis | **Tribe** Harpalini  **Diet** (for genus): seed-eaters as adults and typically also as larvae. **Phenology** annual life cycle |  Kent Wildlife Trust |
| Pterostichus restrictus | **Tribe** Pterostichini |   |

##### Data thoughts & questions
* How to choose which species to model? [Dittrich et al. 2020](https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/12/1/80/htm) chose species to reduce interannual variability by selecting ones that are (1) not directly depending on ephemeral resources and (2) nonspecific predators, feeding on various soil arthropods.
* Model occupancy or abundance? Maybe occupancy since we don't have abundant records
* Canopy structural variability seems like an important predictor (Davies & Asner 2014) - how to quantify this?
* Incorporate structural variables at trap-, plot-, and site-scales. Muller et al 2014 found higher arthropod diversity with increased canopy structural variability and density *at the tree scale*, but lower diversity *at the stand scale*
* Proxy for understory veg could be elevation or dist to stream
* NEON veg diversity data (2m scale cover)
* Climatic/meteorological variables: When Henry Nix started creating SDMs, bioclim was important> WorldClim should be at a fine enough scale for across-site NEON comparisons. Kiarney 2018 & 2019 (Methods in Ecology) used worldclim or bioclim to get 30m scale meteorological data for small-scale microclimate modeling

##### Literature
* Plant diversity sampling design at NEON, [Barnett et al. 2019](https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1002/ecs2.2603)
* NEON design for ground beetle sampling [Hoekman et al. 2017](https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/ecs2.1744)
* Carabids in a Japanese Alpine-Subalpine Zone, [Hiramatsu and Usio 2018](https://www.hindawi.com/journals/psyche/2018/9754376/)
* Forest beetle assemblages and LiDAR, [Muller & Brandl 2009](https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1111/j.1365-2664.2009.01677.x)
    * LiDAR-derived variables: canopy height SD and max tree height at traps from DSM, mean altitude at trap from DTM, microclimaatic conditions proexy from laser penetration rate - see Table 2
    * decrease in body size with laser penetration ratio and larger species in closed forests
    * increase in activity of xylophagous species with an increase of the laser penetration ratio.
    * decrease in the activity of mycetophagous and phytophagous species with altitude because of a reduced availability of hosts. 
* The UK's ECN, kinda like the US's NEON [Brooks et al. 2012]()
    * largest population declines in montane habitat
* Forty years of carabid beetle research in Europe, [Kotze et al. 2011](https://zookeys.pensoft.net/article/2426/)
* Use satellite imagery to build mountainous rove beetle SDM. Machine learning models performed better than GLM and GAM, [Dittrich et al. 2020](https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/12/1/80/htm)
* studies that have used satellite-derived parameters for SDMs in mountainous regions
   * [Dudov et al. 2017](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1134/S2079086417030021)
   * [Oke & Thompson 2015](https://reader.elsevier.com/reader/sd/pii/S0304380015000381?token=D5827B496B1E08299C00AF3D1755BBDB0C19DFECB17E90ED55332A0604FCEBE37DD47F413F373E089863A29B9676D705)
* Review of advances in animal ecology from LiDAR - helpful table for invertebrates, definitions of structural terms [Davies & Asner 2014](https://scse.d.umn.edu/sites/scse.d.umn.edu/files/joyce_paper_2.pdf)
   * canopy variability - Beetle body size decreased with increasing variability, [Muller & Brandl 2009](https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1111/j.1365-2664.2009.01677.x); Arthropod diversity increased at the tree scale, [Muller et al. 2013](https://reader.elsevier.com/reader/sd/pii/S0378112713006816?token=B13AFBBE5F3F96F4728531E4B474FB6D9145A9264D543CBC00589FD4206681536C433D888E337EF8E623D10FB685F360)
   * canopy density - Arthropod diversity increased with increasing canopy density at tree scale, but decreased at stand scale, [Muller et al. 2013](https://reader.elsevier.com/reader/sd/pii/S0378112713006816?token=B13AFBBE5F3F96F4728531E4B474FB6D9145A9264D543CBC00589FD4206681536C433D888E337EF8E623D10FB685F360)
   * canopy height - Beetle body size increased, abundance decreased with increasing height, [Muller & Brandl 2009](https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1111/j.1365-2664.2009.01677.x)
   * elevation - Beetle species richness and spider diversity increased, [Muller & Brandl 2009](https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1111/j.1365-2664.2009.01677.x)
with higher elevation
   * hydrology - Female carabid beetles preferred steep slopes with high flow accumulation, [Work et al. 2011](https://zookeys.pensoft.net/articles.php?id=2927)
   * aspect - Female carabid beetles preferred cooler (north-facing) slopes, [Work et al. 2011](https://zookeys.pensoft.net/articles.php?id=2927)
   * From the eight studies available for review, variability in the canopy profile (both vertical and horizontal), or ‘structural variability’ (Box 3), rather than a single structural metric, was most important for invertebrate assemblages
   * make species distribution models phylogenetically-informed? [Smith et al. 2018](https://reader.elsevier.com/reader/sd/pii/S0169534718302696?token=75E2391C9E4901CA70BFE3188EE133719E1BD8CDBBEB7C0465F3156ECE20664743F44B95A73CB1DDD932089501F2BA27)

##### Resources
* [taxize](https://ropensci.org/tutorials/taxize_tutorial/) package for taxon nomenclature
* Could use McCain Lab carabids from Niwot Ridge: collected along elevational gradient, have veg data associated
